The major feature shipped with the release 0.15.0 of the Binary Compatibility Validator is Kotlin libraries (or KLibs) 
ABI validation support.

This support, however, comes with a few changes that break the plugin's compatibility or changes its behavior:
- In multiplatform projects, empty modules are no longer ignored during ABI validation;
- ABI file names (`api/<project name>.api`) are no longer treated in a case-insensitive way;
- Gradle tasks provided by the plugin changed their API.

If you have a multiplatform project with modules having no sources, configure BCV Gradle tasks manually, 
or have an ABI file with a name in a case different from how the project was named in the settings, 
please check the following steps for smooth migration.

### In multiplatform projects, empty modules are no longer ignored during ABI validation

Previously, if there was an empty Gradle module/project (for example, test-only module), BCV ignored validation of
such a module if the multiplatform platform plugin was applied there. However, BCV behaved differently for similar
projects with the JVM-plugin applied.

Starting from `0.15.0` behavior was aligned and now BCV no longer ignores validation of empty modules/projects.
If you have such a module, please either generate and commit (empty) ABI dump file for it by running 
`./gradlew apiDump`, or consider excluding the module from validation using `ignoredProjects` setting:
```kotlin
apiValidation {
  ignoredProjects += "empty-module"
}
```

### ABI file names are no longer treated in a case-insensitive way

Starting from the version `0.15.0`, name of an ABI dump file stored in the project's directory
has to match project's name. Previously, a project named `gradle-project` might use an ABI file
named `Gradle-Project.api`, but now it has to be `gradle-project.api`.

On case-insensitive filesystems (Windows and macOS filesystems are case-insensitive) the change won't manifest itself,
but on case-sensitive filesystems (Linux filesystems) the validation will start failing due to a missing ABI dump file
error.

You can either rename the existing file or delete it and run `apiDump` task.  

If you're using git SCV, it's highly recommended to use `git mv` command to rename a file, or a pair of `git rm` and 
`git add` commands, if you're deleting the old file and then generating a new one. When done differently, git may
not reflect changes in a repository index (it's specific to case-insensitive filesystems).

If you're using another SCV, please consult its documentation for details on how to deal with file renaming on
case-insensitive filesystems.

### Gradle tasks provided by the plugin changed their API

All Gradle tasks that existed before are still presented and in use, but some of them changed
their API to use Gradle Properties-based configuration. There are several advantages of using Gradle Property
instead of regular Kotlin properties, but the main one is that it improves dependency tracking between tasks.
You can [Gradle docs](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/lazy_configuration.html) for more details
on the subject.

The following task-classes changed their API:
- KotlinApiBuildTask
    - `ignoredPackages`, `nonPublicMarkers`, `ignoredClasses`, `publicPackages`, `publicMarkers`, `publicClasses` are
  all `SetProperty<String>` instances now;
    - `outputApiDir` was renamed to `outputApiFile` and became `RegularFileProperty` instance; now it should point to 
  the generated file instead of a directory holding it;
    - `inputClassesDirs` and `inputDependencies` are both `ConfigurableFileCollection` instances now.
- KotlinApiCompareTask
    - `projectApiFile` and `generatedApiFile` are both `RegularFileProperty` instances now.

If you were configuring `KotlinApiBuildTask.outputApiDir`, `KotlinApiCompareTask.projectApiFile` or
`KotlinApiCompareTask.generatedApiFile` by assigning a file instance to it, now these properties could only 
be configured by using [RegularFileProperty setters](https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/org/gradle/api/file/RegularFileProperty.html).

Value assignments to `KotlinApiBuildTask.inputClassesDirs` and `KotlinApiBuildTask.inputDependencies` properties have 
to be replaced with [ConfigurableFileCollection setters](https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/org/gradle/api/file/ConfigurableFileCollection.html).

All `KotlinApiBuildTask`'s filters could be configured by using [SetProperty setters](https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/SetProperty.html)
now.

Below is an example of how task configuration needs to be updated:
```kotlin
// Old configuration
val buildTask = tasks.register("buildApi", KotlinApiBuildTask::class.java) {
  val classes = compilation.output.classesDirs

  it.inputClassesDirs = files(classes)
  it.inputDependencies = files(classes)
  it.outputApiDir = project.layout.buildDirectory.get().asFile
  it.ignoredPackages = setOf("org.example")
}

val checkTask = tasks.register("checkApi", KotlinApiCompareTask::class.java) {
  it.projectApiFile = project.layout.projectDirectory.dir("api").file("gradle-project.api").asFile
  it.generatedApiFile = project.layout.buildDirectory.get().asFile.resolve("dump.api")
  
  it.dependsOn(buildTask)
}
```

```kotlin
// New configuration
val buildTask = tasks.register("buildApi", KotlinApiBuildTask::class.java) {
  val classes = compilation.output.classesDirs

  it.inputClassesDirs.from(classes)
  it.inputDependencies.from(classes)
  it.outputApiFile.set(project.layout.buildDirectory.map { it.file("gradle-project.api") })
  it.ignoredPackages.set(setOf("org.example"))
}
val checkTask = tasks.register("checkApi", KotlinApiCompareTask::class.java) {
  it.projectApiFile.set(project.layout.projectDirectory.dir("api").file("gradle-project.api"))
  it.generatedApiFile.set(buildTask.flatMap { it.outputApiFile })
}
```
